okay
so
i have to admit this is extremely
awkward
lecturing to an empty room
so i have to imagine there's somebody on
the other end actually listening to me
at some point
um
perhaps this is what youtube stars have
to go through
at some point in their career
um
so what is the purpose of this course so
this is for 18 100 a
real analysis
so the purpose of this course is twofold
the
really i think the first primary purpose
of this course is to
gain experience with proofs
so that means
being able to read a proof being able to
write a proof
and
second statement which or the second
purpose which is
supposed to be kind of
a way to obtain the first purpose
is to
prove statements
about
the real numbers
functions and limits
so the second part this is the
uh
analysis part
okay
so for the first few lectures we're
going to do
um
what
maybe to some will be kind of review
um and most and for most of you a lot of
this material in the first few lectures
will be review
so
but it's a nice way to ease into the
material and things will most definitely
pick up um
after
a few lectures
so
the first set of objects we're going to
define and and try to prove some
statements about are sets
so
definition and
because i use a lot of shorthand
i will
mostly write dfn from now on instead of
the entire word definition
so
a set
is a collection of objects
called elements
or
members okay
now
this course is supposed to be
probably the first uh
really rigorous
course in math that many of you will
deal with
so
essentially everything that we talk
about will be rigorously and
unambiguously defined but we do have to
start somewhere
and
so maybe you think this word
collection is a little ambiguous
and
perhaps you should
um
but
to actually
build up set theory from the ground up
would take us
quite beyond
the scope of this class and
too far afield of the things that we
want to do
or at least that what i want to do
okay so a set is just a collection of
objects called elements or members
there is the simplest set to
define
the empty set
is set with no
elements and we denote it
by this
uh
symbol here circle with a dash through
it
okay
so
with new math typically comes new
notation new symbols that you use
so
let me introduce a few shorthand
notations we'll use
throughout the course
i mean
you know quite honestly this is a little
bit of the fun of doing higher math you
get all these funny symbols
um
and a very accomplished mathematician at
the university of chicago one time said
you're really only interested in the
math where
that has the symbols you like to write
over and over again
so some notation
a
and this symbol which looks like an e s
means
a is
an element of s
a with
dash through this little e
means
everything here but
so a is not an element of s
this upside down a means
for all shorthand for all
backwards e means
there exists
and
a couple more
if you see an arrow like this this mean
this means
implies so i've written down one thing
this implies the next statement i'll put
an arrow between them
and an arrow going both ways means
if and only if meaning if i have a
statement p
if and only if q that means
statement p implies q
and statement q implies p
all right
and if you need a quick refresher on
kind of
uh basic
logic you can find that in the appendix
of the textbook
okay
so
that's the basic definition of set empty
set um
so
in set a another definition is that a is
subset of b
which we write
a
uh
this little symbol that looks like a c b
if
every element in a
is an element in b
hey a little a's and capital a means
uh
little a
is in capital b
so
two sets
are equal we write a equals b
if
a is a subset of b
and b is a subset of a
okay
and
so
and a is
a proper subset of b
if
a is a subset of b
and
a does not equal b
okay
and we typically write that by
a
and with a dash going through a line
underneath this c
to signify that it's not equal so think
of it as
not uh
so less than or equal to but not equal
to
is one way to think about it
okay so
let me say something since i'm now one
two three definitions in
so definitions are a fact of life when
it comes to math in the beginning of any
subject there's going to be a lot of
definitions because we have to have
objects we want to talk about
and we have to have these unambiguously
defined objects
so
um
it may seem like there's going to be a
lot of definitions now uh but this will
let up and we will start proving some
theorems which are facts
about these objects these are the things
that we're really after we're not really
after just making up definitions
definitions are
meant to be
a
rigorous
way of defining an object we're
interested in studying we're interested
in proving theorems facts about
so
again a lot of this is just probably
review
when we describe sets
we will
use these
uh braces and maybe list the elements in
here
or
we will
describe it as x in some set a
satisfying some
property p of x
or we won't write this x and a part
we'll just write all objects x
satisfying
x as uh being an element of whatever
universe we're in
that satisfied property p of x
okay
so
again this you should read this as all x
satisfying property p of x
so
the basic examples
and this is
you should expect this after kind of
seeing any kind of non-trivial
definition
if you were here i would ask you to call
me out so i'll have to police myself but
after every
kind of
semi-interesting definition you should
see examples okay this is how you
actually learn about these things
um
or at least digest what these things are
so we have the natural numbers which
everyone's familiar with since they
started to count one two three
four
and so on
we have the integers
which is zero one minus one two minus
two
so all the natural numbers along with
their additive inverses along with the
zero element an additive identity
we have
rational numbers so this is
written as m over n
such that
m and n are
integers and n does not equal to zero
and we have r
the real numbers
which
i
as of right now cannot actually write
down what they are
in terms of set builder set building
notation
um
in fact this will be our first goal of
the course is to
give a proper
description or definition of what r
uh
actually is um
but you can think of this as
so
as you did in calculus as q
along with
so rationals and irrationals
like
pi
2 and these things so this is fine to
think about for
now um
so
of course
i didn't have to
use these i could have maybe i'm
interested in odd numbers that's the set
of numbers of the form 2m minus 1
where
m is a natural number so this is just 1
3 5 and so on
okay and so
note that we have the inclusions
natural numbers are contained in the
integers which are contained in the
rational numbers which are contained in
the real numbers okay and
you know if
you kind of look at the history of why
these things were thought up in the
first place i mean they were thought up
to solve
uh
you know
kind of polynomial equations that you
couldn't solve in the number system
before
integers were created because i could
not solve
the equation x plus 1 equals 0
in the natural numbers
rationals were thought of because i
could not solve the equation 2x plus 1
equals 0
and the integers
and the real numbers were thought of
because i cannot solve the equation x
squared minus 2 equals 0 in the rational
numbers now
i can't solve the equation x squared
plus 1 equals 0 in the real numbers
which led to
the creation of complex numbers but we
will not deal with complex numbers in
this class
although hopefully if you keep studying
analysis you get on you go on to complex
analysis which is
really a
beautiful subject of study
to this day
so as i said um
let me write this here
our first goal
real goal of the class and this is
something to keep in mind we're not
going to do it uh right now
our first real goal is to
describe what r is
okay mean if we're gonna be proving uh
statements about the real numbers
functions of real numbers and limits
whatever you know those limits that you
learned in calculus
then
we have to
be able to really describe what we're
starting with the real numbers
okay
so
let's get back to sets
to our review of sets
um
so there were some examples
we have a few more definitions
the union of two sets
a and b
is the set which we write
so this is how we denote it a u b
this is the set of
all elements x
x is in a
or x is in b
the intersection of
a and b
so this was defining the union this was
defining the intersection
is to set
a cat b and
this is a set of all x's so that x is in
a
and
x's and b
so the union is take all the things from
a take all the things from b and put
them together in one big basket the
intersection is just
take the things that a and b have in
common
the uh
set difference
of a
with respect to b
is
the set
a backslash b this is the set of all
elements in a
such that x is not
in b
the complement
of a
is the set
a
so this is how i'm denoting the set uh
kind of the next part is how i'm
defining this set this is a set of all
elements in our universe
that is not in
a
and when i say universe i don't mean
this universe necessarily i mean if
we're looking at subsets of r the
complement is you know resp
generally with respect to r
um
or if all of our sets are subsets of q
then our universe would be q the
rationals and we're taking the
complement in there
two sets are disjoint
if
their intersection
is empty okay
so it took me quite a long time
to figure out this complement has an e
in the middle as opposed to an i
as in the complement you would give a
friend
i had to do a lot of spell checking in
my thesis when my advisor pointed that
out
so this is just something to keep in
mind this complement has an e in the
middle of it
um
okay so
let me just kind of draw a quick picture
so
uh
this blob over here is a
this is a
set b
this is a set c
in fact let's make this a little more
okay let's keep see there
then
what
i have here that's
a intersect b
um
this bit over here with the lines going
this way but not including this
this is a take away b
a backslash b
and
okay so that was not meant to be
along the same
direction as this one so let's go
vertical
and everything with a vertical line
is a intersect b
okay so
a backslash has the lines going this
direction
a intersect has the lines going this
a union b has the lines going
vertical
and
c is way over here not touching any of a
and b so a
a and c are disjoint
and b
and c are destroyed
okay they have nothing in common
okay so this is a lot of definitions
we have not proven a single statement
yet so it's about time we do
this is probably one of the most basic
theorems one can prove at the start of a
real analysis class or any class about
proofs
this is
you know analogous to
when you write your first hello world
program in
a programming class so
let me state
the theorem
which is de morgan's laws
and the statement is the following
so if
abc
are sets
then
i have several things i can say
the union of b and c
taking their complement this is
the intersection of the complements
so the complement of the union is the
intersection of the complements
if i take their intersection and take
the complement this is
the union of the complement so the
complement of the intersection
is the union of the complements
now these are complements meaning i
in some sense taking a set difference
with respect to the entire universe but
i can make these things relative to some
set a
so a take away
b union c this is the same as
a take away b
intersect
a take away c
really again this is you should think of
this as a special case of one
um
or at least if you
were to write the proof i'm not going to
because it's all going to be contained
in the first two then you would see it's
really just the proof of this guy
um
a take away b intersect c
equals a
take away b
union
a take away c okay
so
again
for a quick
refresher about logic i would look at
the appendix of the textbook
in general so let me make a few remarks
um before we move on to the proof about
typically how this
is going to look
so this is some remarks
typically a theorem
is a statement
of the type p implies q
let me write this out in english
if some statement p holds
then q
for us it's
if i have any three sets then
i have these equalities between these
operations of sets
uh
so the general structure you'll see of
the class is i have objects which i
define unambiguously i want to prove
theorems now meaning uh true statements
about these objects
and
the real meat is the proof part so what
is
in this
mysterious guy
the proof
it's quite simple
you start with
you assume p meaning what you're given
the hypotheses
or the hypothesis
p
and
i'm going to put dots here through
logic
and
most definitely
most of the time some calculations
you arrive at
q is true
and most proofs are ended with this
little box here
okay
so
most proofs
have this structure i
take my hypotheses
and
these hypotheses mean something in terms
of the definitions i have given
and now i need to use
these uh
unambiguous definitions along with logic
and maybe some calculations
to conclude that statement q is true
that is
the essence of a proof that is
um
all there is to it
um now that doesn't mean it's a simple
thing to learn how to do
that's the point of this course
but distill down that's what
uh a proof is
okay
and q so i said p usually means
something in terms of the definitions we
have but also q will usually mean
something in the definitions
that we've given and so our job is to
verify
q so
let's go with
proving this theorem and in fact i'm
only going to prove property one
property two three and four
i'll likely put on the homework
so
b and c be set so i mean this is the
only hypothesis i get i'm trying to
prove that
uh b union c complement equals
uh the intersection of the complements
so what does that mean so we want to
prove so this is
it's quite helpful especially when
you're first starting to do proofs to
write down what you're actually trying
to prove so even though
i have this statement here
it's an equality between two sets
equality between two sets means
something specifically right we have
that in our definition
uh where is it
over there that two sets are equal if
one is a subset of the other and vice
versa so that's what we have to prove we
have to prove that the left side b union
c complement is a subset of b complement
intersect c complement and vice versa so
we want to prove
that
there's a subset of b
and
okay
so that's what the equality means that's
what we have to prove we have to prove
those two statements now okay and that's
as distilled down as far as we can go
um
so let's prove this now we'll prove this
using
uh again logic and what these things
actually are
so let's prove this first statement uh
here
so i have to show that every element
in this set
is an element of this set
so
i'll even write this down
as wts that means want to show
uh
this is the first thing we'll show
as we go on i'm not going to write as
much as i'm doing right now but this is
the first theorem and proof you're
seeing so i should write down
quite a bit
so the first thing we want to show
is we have this inclusion okay that
means every element here is an element
here so
let x be in
b union c complement
and now we're going to trace what this
means and we'll eventually arrive at x
is in this
so
then x is
not in
b union c that's just the definition of
uh the complement now x is not in b
union c means
x is not in b
and
x is not in c
right because the union is
something's in the union if it's in b or
c so something's not in the union
if it's not in b and not in c
now this implies
simply again by the definition of what
it means to be in the complement
x is in b complement
and x's and c complement
but this again is simply the definition
of x being in
b complement
intersect c complement
okay so you see we started off with an
element in
this guy
and we showed that it's also an element
of the right hand side
so thus
b union c complement
is contained in b complement intersect c
complement
now we want to do this other inclusion
here
now this is one of those kind of rare
situations where
you get to
essentially reverse the entire argument
and get what you want
so
but let's just go through it
in a linear fashion
let's take something from here
and show it's in here
so let x be in the intersection of the
complements
then
that means x is in
b complement
and
x's in c complement
that means
x is not in b so that's this statement
that's the definition of being in the
complement
and x
is not in c that's again the definition
of being in the complement
now just like we used here in this step
this is equivalent to so really i should
in this statement i should have written
this statement is equivalent to this
statement but
we'll remove that so x is not in b and x
is not in c this means x is not in
their union
which implies that
x is in
the complement
of the union
okay
so
thus
we've proven
is the subset of b
and since we've shown both
sets are a subset of each other that
means by the definition of two sets
being equal
they are equal
again this box means really nothing it
just means that's the end of the proof
all right
let's move over here
this is terrible
yeah not everybody uses that little box
to finish or proof
um
some people don't put anything
i was when i was in graduate school i
was a ta for
uh this guy named paul sally
who was a fantastic
teacher and really loved math
who would end
so
amazing story about this guy is you know
when i was his ta he was in his 70s i
think
but he had also had
diabetes so he had lost both of his legs
beneath his
knees he was also legally blind
and he had a patch over one eye
so
he himself often referred to himself as
the
pirate mathematician
but he would end his proofs with
at least in his textbook he didn't ask
me to do this on the board thankfully he
would end his proofs with
a picture of
himself with
this
cob pipe that he had very much in the
pirate
fashion
anyways okay moving on from things that
in proofs
let's go on to uh
next subject
induction
so induction is
a
way to prove theorems about natural
numbers okay
that's you know the theorem itself
is
um
more of a tool rather than
uh an interesting fact on its own
okay
so
let me
state the theorem and then we'll go over
a couple examples on how to use
induction
so
let me recall from i think i just erased
it
n is the natural numbers
and it has an ordering
meaning
um so we'll precisely define what
ordering means but just in your head
this means the usual thing one is less
than two is less than three is less than
four
um
so
a property of the natural numbers which
we'll take as
an axiom is the well ordering property
so an axiom is not something you prove
you assume this about
the objects that you've defined or
studying up to this point
and so the statement is
if
i take a subset of natural numbers
which is non-empty
then
s hat has a
least element or smallest element now
what does this mean let me write this
write this last statement out
i.e there exists
an x and
s st i will often write meaning such
that
or so that
such that
x is less than or equal to y
for all y and s
okay so
every non
uh empty subset of the natural numbers
has a smallest element
okay we're going to take that as an
axiom
as just a property of the natural
numbers which
we'll assume
now using this axiom we're going to
prove
it's not really a
you'll often hear it called as the
principle of mathematical induction
but this will state it as a theorem
instead of a principle whatever a
principle is supposed to be
so
induction so
this is uh
due to pascal or at least in the its
first
rigorous formulation
is
let p n be
statement
depending on
natural number n
okay so maybe we have some equality
between two quantities that involves a
natural number n okay that could be our
statement p of n
um
now we're going to assume
so what are our hypotheses about this uh
statement what are what's our if
assume that this statement satisfies two
properties this first property is
usually recall
referred to as a base case
that is that p of one
is true
and the second
property is
called the inductive step
so
this statement satisfies the following
property
that if you assume p of m is true
then you can prove that p
of n plus one is true
so i have a statement which satisfies
both of these uh properties okay in
particular since i'm assuming p of one
is true
by
the second property p of two is true
and then again by the second property p
of three is true and then p of four and
then p of five and so
if you follow that last line of
reasoning
this means
you should kind of be able to guess what
the conclusion of this theorem is
then
pn
is true for
all natural numbers
okay
all right
so we're going to use the well ordering
property of the natural numbers
to prove
this theorem about induction
okay so
we have our assumptions i'm not going to
although i said
you know over there let bc be sets i'm
not going to rewrite the assumptions
that we have about our statement p
we're just going to start trying to
prove
um
p of n is true for all n
so
let me write our conclusion slightly
differently
let s be the set of all
natural numbers
such that
p of n is not true
so what i want to show is that p of n is
true for all n
so that's equivalent to saying
we want to show
that s
is empty okay
set of natural numbers where p of n is
not true this is empty this is
equivalent to saying p and p of n is
true for all n
and the way we're going to do this is
[Applause]
um
kind of another staple of
mathematical proofs is trying to prove
this by contradiction
okay
so
what does that mean
[Applause]
make a few comments about what that
means proof by contradiction
okay so
in a proof by contradiction so this is
what i'm about to write down is not part
of the proof this is commentary uh not
to be included in the proof
what does it mean to say we're going to
prove
s
is equal to the empty set by
contradiction we're going to assume
that
the statement we want to prove
is false or are we not false but we want
to assume that the
uh negation of the statement we want to
prove
is true and then arrive at a false
statement okay
so
we want to assume
this is what we're going to do
we're going to assume the negation of
the statement we want to prove namely s
is non-empty
okay
and
from this we want to derive
a false statement
okay
and
so if we are to do if we were able to do
that then
let me just say again you can
check in the appendix or you can just
believe me that
the rules of logic then say
that
that our initial assumption that s was
not empty is false
to begin with okay so rules of logic
meaning
i cannot start from a true assumption
and derive in a logically consistent way
a false statement
okay um that is if we believe that the
rules of logic we're using
are
uh consistent
which
that's a little bit
hairy to talk about but you for our
purposes of our class
um
you can believe me that the rules of
logic we use
or at least except that the rules of
logic we're going to use are
consistent and sound
okay so back to the proof
at hand we have this set of natural
numbers where the statement is not true
we want to show it is empty we're going
to do it by contradiction meaning we're
going to assume the negation of the
statement we want to prove namely s is
non-empty and we're going to derive a
false
statement from that assumption okay
and by the rules of logic that means
that our initial assumption that s is
not empty
is in fact false
okay
all right
so
towards the
contradiction suppose that s is
non-empty
okay
now we're going to use the well ordering
property of the natural numbers
by
uh the well
ordering property of the natural numbers
s has a
least element
x
okay
now
what do we know about x so first off x
cannot be one okay
s is a set where this property does not
hold x cannot be one because
let me again rewrite that this
fact that s is the least element
uh let me just reiterate that s has the
least element
in the set
okay
now x cannot be 1 because we're assuming
the base case meaning p of 1 is true
so
since p 1 is true
that means 1 is not an s
which means
x is not one
particular x must be bigger than one so
x is some magical
natural number out there bigger than one
that's the least element of this set s
okay
[Applause]
since x is the least element
of s so
let me draw
along the number line we have one two
three four out there some magic point x
which is the least element of s
and the rest of the subset s lies to the
right of
this number x
right because it's the least element of
s
and therefore
x minus 1 cannot be an s
so since x is the least element of s
and
x minus 1 is less than x
this means that x minus 1 is not an s
otherwise it would be a smaller element
than x in s
so thus
what does it mean to not be an s
it means that p of x minus 1 is true
by the definition of s
this means p of x minus 1 is true
okay
but by the second property we're
assuming about our statement p
this means that
the next
guy in line x minus 1 plus 1 is true
which is just x
which means that
x
is not an s
okay
so from the assumption so let me just uh
recap
from the assumption that s is non-empty
we've derived two facts
one
x has a least element in s
and
that element is also not an s
so
written out
we've concluded there exists a natural
number
which is both ns
and not in this and this is a false
statement
you cannot have
uh an object the member that's both in
the set and not in the set
okay
and
but at the end of contradiction
arguments i'll usually put two arrows
hitting each other
so that's a contradiction therefore our
initial assumption that s is non
empty has to be false
and therefore s
is the empty set
okay
so i encourage you to kind of
go through that proof a little slowly
because
maybe you got turned around by
taking the compliments or or
the general scheme of how proof by
contradiction works
but
don't spend too much time on it because
as i've said
this theorem itself and its proof are
not
the thing we're really interested in or
at least it's not the most interesting
it's more of a tool that we'll use to
prove more interesting statements
okay so how do we actually use this
theorem induction
to prove other statements so
i guess i should include this here
you know this is falls under the
umbrella of logic meaning we're going to
approve
previous we're going to use previous
statements we've proven to prove new
statements
but anyway so so how do we use induction
and practice
so
if we want to prove some statement
for all n
p n is true
in the print then this theorem about
induction
this theorem of induction tells us we
just have to do two things
[Applause]
okay we have to prove
the base case
and this is usually easy
okay you just stick the number one into
the statement that you want to prove and
that's uh
that's the end of the story
and the second step is usually or the
second thing we have to prove is the
more involved part which is
we have to prove
that
the statement that if
pm is true
then
p of n plus 1 is true
okay it's kind of
if we want to do a proof by induction
there's kind of two smaller proofs we
have to do first we have to prove p of
one is true and then we have to prove
this statement if p of m
then p of n plus one
okay so again this is usually referred
to as the base case this is the
inductive step
so let's
try and actually do this
all right so
and
so another question i get at the
beginning of a course especially about
proofs you know because there's a lot of
uncertainty about what you can assume is
true what can you use what can you not
use
right now
at this point
you can use
whatever you know about
any of the algebraic properties you know
about the real numbers
the comp the rational numbers
and by algebraic properties i mean
you know of a plus b equals c then a
plus b times d equals c times d
and what you know about um inequalities
so we're going to go much more in depth
into ordering which is what
you know inequality uh
is
a part of
but
you can use all the properties you know
about
solving inequalities or manipulating
inequalities meaning
um if i have one number is less than or
equal to another number then when i
multiply both sides by a positive number
that doesn't change the inequality so
you can use all of these
algebraic properties of
rationals and real numbers
from here on out
there will be it i mean
so we're going to be proving things
about calculus so you certainly cannot
use anything
about
continuity
differentiation or anything like that
but
for now you can use all the algebraic
properties you know so the first
statement we're going to try and
prove using induction
is
the statement that
for all c
not equal to 1
we're all in a natural number
1 plus c plus c squared
plus c to the n equals
1 minus c to the n plus 1 over 1 minus c
okay
so
this here
is our
statement p of n it depends on a natural
number n
okay
so we're going to do this by induction
which means we're going to
do those two things we're going to prove
the base case p of 1 which i said is
easy and then we're going to prove the
second case in the second property the
inductive step which is a little more
involved but not so much involved
at least in the in the beginning so
let me
call this inequality
star
we're going to prove star
by
induction so
first we will do the base case
and
like i said the base case is usually you
just plug in n equals 1 and verify that
p of n is true and that's what we do
um
1 plus c to the 1 which is the left hand
side
does in fact equal
one minus c to the one plus one
over one minus c because this right hand
side
one minus c squared is one minus c times
one plus c
the one minus these cancel
and so the base case is proven all right
now we do the inductive step
okay
so we're going to assume
that star holds for n equals m so we're
going to assume p of m so
assume
that
1 plus c plus
c to the m
equals 1 minus c
over 1 minus c
okay
now we want to show
again let's
write out what we want to do what's our
plan
i want to prove
that this
equality
line star holds
for n equals n plus one
okay
so again this is
what i wrote here this is basically star
for n equals m
okay
and let me call this second
inequality the second equality two star
so this is my assumption
for m n equals m
okay
so
let's
take the left side for
n equals n plus one and see if we cannot
massage it to get the right hand side
uh
for
i should say the right hand side for n
equals n plus one
so
so here is the calculation part so we
have one
plus c plus
c to the m plus c to the
n plus one this is the
m plus one
case of the left hand side of star which
we want to show is to the
is equal to the n equals n plus one case
of the right hand side
now
this is equal to now we already know
what this is equal to by our assumption
this is by
the second star there which is what
we're assuming is true
this is equal to one minus c
n plus one over one minus c
plus
c n plus one
and
so now we just do a little bit of
algebra this is equal to 1 over 1 minus
e n plus 1
plus c
n plus 1 minus c
n plus 2
over 1 minus c
those cancel and i'm left with 1 minus c
to the n plus 2 and i'll write it
just so that you can see this is really
the n plus 1
case
all right
so again we arrived at this first step
by our assumption
the second starred
equation
okay
so
the star holds
for n equals n plus one
so by
induction or really i should say the
theorem
of induction that we proved
our equality
between those
two objects or two expressions
is valid for all n
okay
okay so
let's do one
more example of
using induction
so
let's prove
if c is
a real number bigger than or equal to
minus one
then for all n
natural number
1 plus c to the n
is bigger than or equal to
1 plus n times c
okay
all right so
we're going to do this by induction
again
that means we need to prove the base
case and we need to do the inductive
step
so base case as always we'll so this is
just right here we're going to do this
by
induction
so as you can see the base case
is again n equals 1 is
clear just by looking at it
1 plus c to the 1 in fact equals
1 plus 1 times c
so it's certainly bigger than or equal
to 1 plus n times c
so um
i think that's the last stars i'll use
for this uh lecture
so
our statement
our inequality uh star star star
holds for
n equals 1. all right so that's our base
case now
we're going to assume that this
inequality holds for
n equals m and try to prove that it
holds for n equals n plus one
so
we're assuming this when n equals m
so 1 plus c
to the m is bigger than or equal to
1 plus m times c
and we want to prove
this inequality with n equal to n plus
one okay and we're just assuming
um
this guy
okay
so
i want to get the statement for n equals
n plus one
one way to do that is
this left side i want to get
let's look at the
n equals m plus one side and see what we
can do with it
so again this is a calculation part and
logic
so we have one plus c to the m plus one
so that's the n equals n plus one
side of uh
this
this is equal to one plus c
times one plus c
to the m
now we're assuming again this inequality
this is the n equals m case
so we can use it so we're assuming it we
use it this
and since c is bigger than or equal to
minus 1 1 plus c is non-negative so
this
thing is bigger than or equal to this
thing so if i multiply both sides by 1
plus c i preserve the inequality so this
is bigger than or equal to 1 plus
m c
okay
again this just follows from essentially
the assumption
multiplied through by 1 plus c
okay
and now
so now i'm gonna
finagle this
so let me just
i'm not i'm not doing anything different
here i'm just going to rewrite this over
here so that i can
have a chain of inequality so i have 1
plus c to the n plus 1 is greater than
or equal to 1 plus c
1 plus m c
all right so now this is bigger than or
equal to this
and
this here
so when i write it equal i do not mean
that this left side is now equal to what
i'm about to write here that means the
previous thing on
here is equal to what i'm about to write
here
okay
this is a
typical um
fashion in
writing down inequalities or i guess
practice
so this is equal to one so just doing
the algebra
n plus 1 times c plus
m times c squared
okay
now this part is exactly the n equals n
plus 1 side of
this
and i have a little room to give because
now this is
um
plus something that's non-negative
let me just rewrite this again this
means that 1 plus c to the n plus 1
is greater than or equal to 1 plus
so again i'm kind of writing a lot here
i will stop writing as much as the
course goes on
um
and
but i encourage you especially in the
beginning to write um
you know all the steps in logic okay
um
so again i'm not rewriting
anything i'm just
summarizing what i've done here
now this right hand side so i have this
is bigger than or equal to this and
this right hand side since i have a
number plus something non-negative m
times c squared m is a natural number
this is bigger than or equal to
uh 1 plus n plus 1 times c
thus
1 plus c to the n plus 1
is
greater than or equal to
which is the n equals
n plus one case
so by induction
this inequality triple star holds for
all n
all right